OpenApi Tools (#3734)
AmadeusITGroup/otter: docs/openapi/DEPENDENCY_RESOLUTION_CONCEPT.md

- Reference models from external packages
- Apply transformations (masking, renaming, etc.) to imported external models
- Manage complex dependency relationships between OpenAPI specifications
- Handle multi in-depth versions, range versions and conflict resolution thanks to the [NPM version mechanism](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm)

## Concept

The OpenAPI resolution mechanism is based on the [NPM package resolution](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm) on top of which it allows to reference and transform inner models.

### NPM package dependency

The use of NodeJs greatly simplifies the retrieval and versioning of specifications.
Thanks to it, a [Renovate configuration](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/) can be set to automatize the upgrade of specifications.

To depend on an OpenAPI package, the dependency can be added via the command:

```shell
npm install @my/dep-spec
```

> [!NOTE]
> An additional `npm install` may be required on certain versions of `npm` to ensure the `postinstall` task is run.\
> `yarn` or `pnpm` can be used instead.

It will then appear in the `dependencies` field of the `package.json` file.

> Thanks to the NPM dependency mechanism, multi-artifact versions are fully supported and will be resolved according to [range intersection](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/node-js/how-does-npm-handle-version-conflicts/).

Reviewer: do we want to keep this url or is there a more official documentation?

# Dependency Resolution Concept

## Overview

The `@ama-openapi/core` package provides a dependency management system for [OpenAPI specifications](https://www.openapis.org/). It allows you to:

- Specify OpenAPI model dependencies to used in a [manifest file](./MANIFEST_CONFIGURATION.md).
- Allow reference to models from external packages

> - Apply transformations (masking, renaming, etc.) to imported external models

Author: It is not impacted NPM but it is driving the way the model is extracted (for the section `Model extraction` of this page).

Without transformation, the model is extracted as a simple `$ref`, if a transformation is applied a full model is generated.

I was thinking it is interesting to get the big picture of the the reasons of the usage of the NPM dependency structure but if you think it should be changed because unclear, I am open to suggestion :)

- Manage complex dependency relationships between OpenAPI specifications
- Handle multi in-depth versions, range versions and conflict resolution thanks to [NPM version mechanism](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm).

## Concept

The OpenAPI resolution mechanism is based on the [NPM package resolution](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm) on top of which it allows to reference and transform inner models.

### NPM package dependency

> The usage of NodeJs greatly simplify the retrieval and versioning of specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The use of NodeJs greatly simplifies the retrieval and versioning of specifications.
```

Thanks to it, a [Renovate configuration](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/) can be set to automatize the upgrade of specifications.

To depend on an OpenAPI package, the dependency can be added via the command:

```shell
npm install @my/dep-spec
```

> [!NOTE]

> > An additional `npm install` may be required on certain version of `npm` to ensure the `postinstall` task to run.\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> An additional `npm install` may be required on certain versions of `npm` to ensure the `postinstall` task is run.\
```

> `yarn` or `pnpm` can be used instead.

It will then appear in the `dependencies` field of `package.json` file.

Thanks to the NPM dependency mechanism, multi-artifact versions are fully supported and will be resolved according to [range intersection](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/node-js/how-does-npm-handle-version-conflicts/).

For example:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
spec2-2["spec2@~1.2.0"]
spec2-1["spec2@~1.1.0"]
spec1 --> spec2-2
spec1 --> spec3 --> spec2-1
```

Will bring the 2 versions of the `spec2` in the final bundle generated by [Redocly](https://redocly.com/) (as there is no intersection between `~1.1.0` and `~1.2.0`).

If needed, NPM offers the feature to enforce the version over the dependencies via the [overrides field](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#overrides):

```json5
// in package.json
{
  "name": "my-specification",
  "dependencies": {
    "spec2": "~1.2.0",
    "spec3": "latest"
  },
  "overrides": {
    "spec2": "1.2.0"
  }
}
```

will result to a single version:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
spec2["spec2@1.2.0"]
spec1 --> spec2
spec1 --> spec3 --> spec2
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The NPM dependency allow access to the models but to refer to a model in your specification they need to be listed in the [manifest file](./DEPENDENCY_RESOLUTION_CONCEPT.md#model-extraction).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The NPM dependency allows access to the models, but to refer to a model in your specification, they need to be listed in the [manifest file](./DEPENDENCY_RESOLUTION_CONCEPT.md#model-extraction).
```

> [!NOTE]
> More details regarding the dependency in `package.json` are available in the [Shareable specification section](./SHAREABLE_SPECIFICATION.md).

### Model extraction

Once the model package is available for NodeJs (cf. [NPM package dependency](./DEPENDENCY_RESOLUTION_CONCEPT.md#npm-package-dependency)), we need to extract the models to make them accessible from the specification files.

The dependency management system uses [manifest configuration files](./MANIFEST_CONFIGURATION.md) to define which OpenAPI should be reachable and how to process them.\
The extraction can then be processed by the command `ama-openapi install` from [@ama-openapi/cli package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ama-openapi/cli).

> The process will then extract the models into the directory `models_external/` which can be referred in you specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process will then extract the models into the directory `models_external/`, which can be referred to in your specification.
```
